Surging Chargers deal with challenging logistics of London trip


CLEVELAND – In his four years at Western Oregon, a small Division II school in Monmouth, Oregon, Chargers wideout Tyrell Williams went on his fair share of less-than-ideal road trips.
There was a 28-hour bus trip to Utah and one nearly as long to Los Angeles. The logistics were, more or less, a nightmare.
“We lost both of those games, too,” Williams recalled. “So it was rough.”
This week, the Chargers find themselves in the midst of their own prolonged road trip, albeit with no lengthy bus rides necessary. After their 38-14 beatdown of the Browns on Sunday, the Chargers will practice in Cleveland until Thursday, when they’ll fly to London, ahead of their Sunday matchup with the Titans at Wembley Stadium.
The logistics involved in such a trip are extensive. Schedules are meticulously planned. Sleep patterns are analyzed. Jet lag, for a team used to playing on the West Coast, becomes a serious concern. But the circumstances are at least different from what Williams experienced with Western Oregon. The Wolves weren’t exactly staying at the Ritz-Carlton, like the Chargers will this week.
“This is a bit better,” joked Williams, who had a season-high 118 yards and two touchdowns on Sunday.
But the challenges are real, too. The Chargers have been adamant about arriving across the pond later in the week, as opposed to practicing in London in the lead-up to Sunday’s game. Chargers coach Anthony Lynn said he leaned especially on defensive coordinator Gus Bradley’s experience playing overseas in managing the logistics of the trip.
In his four years as Jaguars head coach, Bradley traveled to London every season, making him one of the league’s foremost experts on the matter. Earlier this month, Seahawks coach Pete Carroll also reached out to Bradley to get his advice.
Of all the logistics involved, proper sleep may be the most problematic. When the Chargers kick off in London, it’ll be 6:30 a.m. in Los Angeles. For that reason, the Chargers will practice several hours earlier this week.
“You have to put a lot of focus on (sleep),” Lynn said. “Guys are just not used to playing under those conditions. You have to look at sleep patterns and sleep ideals.”
The biggest concern of staying the week in Cleveland, Lynn said, was managing distractions and keeping players focused. But as the Chargers ride a three-game win streak into their matchup with the Titans, spending an entire week together as a team has its benefits, too.
“There will be a lot of good team bonding,” Philip Rivers said on Sunday. “We’re already a pretty close team, but I still think it will be good for us.”
Keenan Allen is already one of the league’s best receivers. But after the Chargers handed him the ball on four successful sweeps on Sunday, Allen is convinced he could take on another position, too.
“I’m a running back now,” Allen joked. “I used to play running back back in the day, so it ain’t nothin.”
Coming into Sunday’s game, Allen had just three career rushing attempts for 14 yards in 59 career games. Against the Browns, he racked up 41 yards on 4 carries.
Travis Benjamin is usually the Chargers’ weapon of choice on jet sweeps. But the speedy wideout has missed four games this season with a foot injury, leaving Allen to handle those duties. Lynn isn’t surprised to see him fill in successfully; though, he said Benjamin will return to that role when healthy.
“Keenan is a good runner,” Lynn said. “He’s a good athlete. His change of direction power is good. We know he can run the football, and his blocking was just as good. … There’s nothing he can’t do.”

In the second quarter, faced with a 2nd-and-3, Allen went into motion behind Rivers, who snapped the ball and immediately tossed it to Allen. Allen then tried to throw it back to Rivers, who could only get one hand on Allen’s errant throw. The loose ball was somehow recovered by the Chargers, who were left with a 3rd-and-22.
The botched play was the only major mistake the Chargers made on Sunday. Lynn laughed when asked about it.
“Every time you call a trick play, if it works, you’re a genius,” Lynn said. “If it doesn’t work, it’s a bad call.
“It was a bad call.”
