Lakers veterans impressed by younger players’ work ethic for film study


EL SEGUNDO — Back in 2008 when JaVale McGee was a rookie, the imperfect tool he could use was a DVD player.
The 7-foot center didn’t have a computer with a DVD drive, so when he wanted to watch film of his games, he had to boot up his DVD player at home. He didn’t have access to it on a plane, and he definitely wasn’t watching his clips in games from the bench.
Those are things that the young players on the Lakers are doing now. It’s easier for them because of technological changes, but McGee still credits them for doing the work.
“Back in the day, we couldn’t just get an iPad and get our plays we just did 10 minutes ago and get them on the bench,” he said. “So it’s kind of different but still, they do it. They don’t have to do it, so it’s impressive. …  Just thinking about how much more advanced these kids can be when they get 10 years in the league is crazy.”
It’s been a talking point among the veterans in the Lakers’ locker room: It always seems like the returning players from last season’s team are buried in film work. Rajon Rondo was surprised last week to see just about every one of his teammates studying game clips on iPads on a recent team flight.
“As a team, I haven’t seen that many guys combined in the last four, five seasons, I think,” he said. “So, it was very refreshing to see. Understanding that this team is committed.”
It’s a far cry from what Coach Luke Walton did himself as a young player: He recalled playing games of spades with Karl Malone, Gary Payton and Rick Fox as a rookie, trying to hold his own while the older card sharks were on the prowl.
The Lakers staff tries to do its part to give the players the means to do their homework, from giving them the iPads themselves to the on-the-spot cutting of film. And yet they don’t force anyone to watch – that’s up to the players themselves.
Walton thinks it’s just as much about the personalities of the players as it is the availability of the clips. He mentioned that Kyle Kuzma is usually quick to text him about defensive clips from his last game and how he can improve – sometimes a few hours after the game itself.
“We and the front office have done a really nice job of getting basketball junkies in the organization here, so that doesn’t surprise me,” he said. “That’s part of when we talk about culture, what we’re talking about. And part of it is going out and getting guys that just love this game and want to get better.”
The willingness to learn goes beyond film study. The young players have talked a lot about “being a sponge” to soak up knowledge from veterans, and it doesn’t appear to be lip service. The veterans have noticed how much the younger players have been willing to listen – particularly when LeBron James speaks.
It took Rondo to flash back to his younger days with the Celtics, learning from Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Ray Allen.
“I thought I knew it all but I learned so much from my vets and they were willing to share information with me and I was just trying to be a sponge,” he said. “And it kind of reminds me how Kuz is, (Brandon Ingram, Lonzo Ball) and those young guys remind me kind of myself back in the day as far as wanting to learn so much and answer a lot of questions.”
Insisting it’s not a final decision for Thursday’s season opener in Portland, Walton acknowledged that Rondo and Kentavious Caldwell-Pope were the starters in Monday’s practice, the team’s first back in the training facility after a long week away. Walton said he is evaluating who will start “day-by-day.”
He explicitly mentioned Caldwell-Pope as a standout in Monday’s action, even though the guard left the trip to San Jose early to get treatment for right knee tendinitis. Walton said he doesn’t think the injury will be a lingering issue – Caldwell-Pope went back to Los Angeles because the hotel the Lakers were staying in was a less adequate space for treatment than the team training facility.
Walton said he believes the team benefits from Caldwell-Pope’s shooting and spacing ability and calls Rondo “an elite point guard in this league.” Walton added that Ball not starting at this point isn’t necessarily a reflection of his conditioning after taking some time to return after offseason knee surgery.
“Whether Lonzo starts or not is gonna be based on where we’re at as a team and what’s working for us right now,” Walton said. “He’s looked great and he continues to play better and better. Had another solid day today.”
The media was treated to a sight Monday that’s been rare so far this preseason: Rookie forward Moe Wagner participated in team 5-on-0 work and then ran in some 3-on-3 drills with some assistant coaches. The German forward out of Michigan missed all six preseason games with a reported knee contusion that’s bothered him since Summer League.
“He can do non-contact in practice,” Walton said. “And this is more of a controlled setting, contact 3-on-3, that type of thing. He’s gotta get some of his wind back, knock off some of the rust.”
