Moore League playoff watch: Lakewood comes roaring back into race for final postseason spots


Long Beach Poly has already clinched a playoff spot, with one more game standing between the Jackrabbits and an undefeated Moore League title.
But behind Poly, there is a tight race for the final two automatic postseason bids from the Moore League.
Lakewood roared back into the race with a 34-7 win over Compton, though the Lancers have a tough road ahead to get past Wilson and Millikan, the current front-runners for the final two spots.
Here’s a quick glance at where each of the remaining teams in the playoff hunt stand and their remaining schedules.
COMPTON
Moore League record: 1-3
Games remaining: at Cabrillo, Oct. 19; at Wilson, Oct. 26
The outlook: The Tarbabes will need a lot of help to earn an automatic playoff bid at this point. Firstly, Compton needs to win out, beating Cabrillo and Wilson. Then, it needs Wilson to lose this week to Millikan and for Lakewood to lose its final two games. If all of this occurs, Compton would be tied with Wilson at 3-3 in Moore League play and own the tiebreaker with the Bruins by virtue of a head-to-head victory. That’s Compton’s road to third place.
LAKEWOOD
Moore League record: 2-2
Games remaining: vs. Poly, Oct. 19; vs. Cabrillo, Oct. 26
The outlook: Much like Compton, Lakewood has a tricky path to getting into the playoffs. The Lancers need to win out and then get some help from either Millikan or Wilson. Since Lakewood lost to both the Rams and the Bruins earlier this season, it needs either Millikan or Wilson to lose the last two games of the season. If both teams split their final two games, it would result in a three-way tie between the teams that would leave Lakewood on the outside looking in.
MILLIKAN
Moore League record: 3-1
Remaining games: vs. Wilson, Oct. 19; at Jordan, Oct. 26
The outlook: The Rams are in pretty good position. A win over Wilson this week would clinch a playoff spot. If Millikan loses to the Bruins, then Millikan can still clinch with a win over Jordan in the season finale, or one Lakewood loss.


Moore League record: 3-1
Remaining games: at Millikan, Oct. 19; vs. Compton, Oct. 26
The outlook: Much like Millikan, Wilson’s playoff road is pretty straightforward. The Bruins can clinch with a win over Millikan or Compton in the final two weeks of the season. One Lakewood loss would also secure Wilson a playoff spot.

