Dodgers shut out in Game 3 by Jhoulys Chacin, Brewers bullpen



Milwaukee Brewers shortstop Orlando Arcia forces out Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado at second base in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Andre Ethier throws the ceremonial first pitch before game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers starting pitcher Walker Buehler throws in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers starting pitcher Jhoulys Chacin throws in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasiel Puig celebrates hitting a double in the second inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado is forced out at second bay by Milwaukee Brewers shortstop Orlando Arcia in the second inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Walker Buehler reacts after striking out with bases loaded in the second inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasmani Grandal hits a double in the fifth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasmani Grandal hits a double in the fifth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Travis Shaw is congratulated after scoring on a wild pitch in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Travis Shaw slides safe at third with a triple as Los Angeles Dodgers shortstop Manny Machado waits for the throw in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Cody Bellinger #35 of the Los Angeles Dodgers slams into centerfield on a triple by Travis Shaw (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers in thesixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers center fielder Cody Bellinger slams into the center field wall trying to catch a ball hit by Milwaukee Brewers’ Travis Shaw for a triple in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Cody Bellinger #35 of the Los Angeles Dodgers slams into centerfield on a triple by Travis Shaw (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers in thesixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Cody Bellinger #35 of the Los Angeles Dodgers slams into centerfield on a triple by Travis Shaw (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers in thesixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers center fielder Cody Bellinger slams into the center field wall trying to catch a ball hit by Milwaukee Brewers’ Travis Shaw for a triple in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Cody Bellinger #35 of the Los Angeles Dodgers slams into centerfield on a triple by Travis Shaw (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers in thesixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers starting pitcher Walker Buehler throws in the 1st inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Christian Yelich slides safe at home past Los Angeles Dodgers catcher Yasmani Grandal in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers center fielder Cody Bellinger catches a line drive in the 3rd inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers starting pitcher Jhoulys Chacin walks off the mound after throwing a strikeout to end the 2nd inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasiel Puig hits a double in the 2nd inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado gets the first hit of the game for the Dodgers of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers starting pitcher Jhoulys Chacin smiles after getting the final out in the third inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers shortstop Orlando Arcia forces out Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado at second base in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Cody Bellinger heads past manager Dave Roberts as he heads back to the dugout after being called out in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado looks on after being called out in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Umpires put headphones on as a play is being reviewed in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers catcher Erik Kratz chats with starting pitcher Jhoulys Chacin as a play is being reviewed in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasmani Grandal doubles in the in the fifth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers shortstop Manny Machado throws out Milwaukee Brewers’ Christian Yelich in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

The Dodgers bench looks on in the sixth inning after a Brewers run scored of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers starting pitcher Walker Buehler talks to his teammates after giving up a triple in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Justin Turner reached second base on an error on this at bat in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Orlando Arcia, left, celebrates his 2-run homer with Milwaukee Brewers’ Erik Kratzin the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers right fielder Yasiel Puig can’t reach a 2-run homer hit by Milwaukee Brewers’ Orlando Arcia in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Danny Lehmann strikes out to end the game in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Yasmani Grandal slams his bat to the ground after striking out in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Cody Bellinger slams his bat down after flying out in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Cody Bellinger slams his bat down after flying out in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Cody Bellinger slams his bat down after flying out in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Cody Bellinger slams his bat down after flying out in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado pumps up the crowd after hitting a double in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers second baseman Travis Shaw falls into the stands while chasing a pop fly in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Justin Turner gets a single in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Hernan Perez is caught stealing second by Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chris Taylor in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Hernan Perez is caught stealing second by Los Angeles Dodgers’ Chris Taylor in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

in the xxx inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers’ Matt Kemp reacts after striking out to end the eighth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers Josh Hader pitches in relief in the eighth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, Oct. 15, 2018. (Photo by David Crane, Daily News/SCNG)

Milwaukee fans celebrate as a Dodgers fan comes up with the home-run ball hit by Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers as Yasiel Puig #66 of the Los Angeles Dodgers reacts after the two-run shot in the seventh inning in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers celebrates with Erik Kratz #15 after his two-run home run in the seventh inning off of starting pitcher Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers during Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers rounds the bases past starting pitcher Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers after his two-run home run in the seventh inning during Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Yasiel Puig #66 of the Los Angeles Dodgers can’t make the catch on this seventh inning him run by Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Fans show their love for Ryan Braun #8 of the Milwaukee Brewers after he made a catch in the outfield against the Los Angeles Dodgers in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Justin Turner #10 of the Los Angeles Dodgers is out at first to end the first inning as Jesus Aguilar #24 of the Milwaukee Brewers makes the catch in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Fans cheer before the Los Angeles Dodgers take on the Milwaukee Brewers in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Los Angeles Dodgers starting pitcher Walker Buehler gives up a 2-run homer to Milwaukee Brewers’ Orlando Arcia in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Yasmani Grandal #9 of the Los Angeles Dodgers slams his bat into the ground after striking out swinging in the ninth inning against the Milwaukee Brewers in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. The Milwaukee Brewers defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers. 4-0. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Yasiel Puig #66 of the Los Angeles Dodgers heads to the dugout as Travis Shaw #21 and Mike Moustakas #18 of the Milwaukee Brewers celebrate after defeating the Dodgers 4-0 in Game 3 of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on Monday, October 15, 2018. (Photo by Kevin Sullivan, Orange County Register/SCNG)

Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers reacts after giving up a RBI double to Ryan Braun (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Ryan Braun of the Milwaukee Brewers reacts after hitting a RBI double against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers celebrates in the dugout with teammates after hitting a two run home run against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 7th inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Christian Yelich #22 of the Milwaukee Brewers scores past catcher Yasmani Grandal #9 of the Los Angeles Dodgers on a RBI double by teammate Ryan Braun (not pictured) in the First inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Orlando Arcia, right, celebrates with teammate Erik Kratz #15 of the Milwaukee Brewers after hitting a two run home run against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers points toward the stands after hitting a two run home run against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Starting pitcher Walker Buehler of the Los Angeles Dodgers looks on as Orlando Arcia #3 of the Milwaukee Brewers rounds first base after hitting a two run home run in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Jhoulys Chacin #45 of the Milwaukee Brewers smiles after getting a out to end the third inning of game three of the National League Championship Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers’ Travis Shaw is congratulated by teammates in the dugout after scoring in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Milwaukee Brewers shortstop Orlando Arcia forces out Los Angeles Dodgers’ Manny Machado at second base in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers throws out Travis Shaw of the Milwaukee Brewers at first base in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Justin Turner, Left, Joc Pederson and Manny Machado of the Los Angeles Dodgers watch from the dugout in the eighth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series against the Milwaukee Brewers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

The Milwaukee Brewers bench reacts as teammate Orlando Arcia (not pictured) hit a two run home run against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Dave Roberts #30 of the Los Angeles Dodgers looks on against the Milwaukee Brewers in the third inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Christian Yelich of the Milwaukee Brewers celebrates with teammates in the dugout after scoring on a RBI double by teammates Ryan Braun against the Los Angeles Dodgers in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Chris Taylor #3 of the Los Angeles Dodgers tags out Hernan Perez #14 of the Milwaukee Brewers on a attempted steal of second base as teammate Manny Machado looks on in the ninth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers throws out Travis Shaw (not pictured) of the Milwaukee Brewers at first base in the fourth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Walker Buehler #21 of the Los Angeles Dodgers throws to the plate against the Milwaukee Brewers in the first inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Cody Bellinger #35 of the Los Angeles Dodgers reacts after striking out against the Milwaukee Brewers with runners in scoring position in the sixth inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Brian Dozier #6 of the Los Angeles Dodgers reacts as he was called out on strikes for the final out of the game as the Milwaukee Brewers defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers 4-0 during game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Enrique Hernandez, left, along with Cody Bellinger, center, and Manny Machado, right, of the Los Angeles Dodgers look on at the the Milwaukee Brewers score in the seventh inning of game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

The National Anthem prior to game three of the National League Championship Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Milwaukee Brewers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Max Muncy of the Los Angeles Dodgers warms up in the outfield prior to game three of the National League Championship Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Milwaukee Brewers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Max Muncy of the Los Angeles Dodgers warms up in the outfield prior to game three of the National League Championship Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Milwaukee Brewers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

Justin Turner of the Los Angeles Dodgers against Milwaukee Brewers during game three of the National League Championship Series at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)

A flyover prior to game three of the National League Championship Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Milwaukee Brewers at Dodger Stadium on Monday, October 15, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. Milwaukee Brewers won 4-0. (Photo by Keith Birmingham, Pasadena Star-News/SCNG)
Expand
LOS ANGELES — When the Santa Ana winds blow, as Raymond Chandler wrote, it can “make your nerves jump and your skin itch.”
The Dodgers can relate.
Journeyman right-hander Jhoulys Chacin held them to three hits in the first 5-1/3 innings of Monday’s Game 3 and the Milwaukee Brewers starting pitchers are the unexpected, unassailable force in this National League Championship Series.
Unable to damage Chacin or come back against the Brewers’ bullpen this time, the Dodgers lost 4-0 and now trail the best-of-seven NLCS two games to one.
“Come back tomorrow and get them,” said Cody Bellinger, now 1 for 21 in this postseason and one of the guilty parties as the Dodgers went 0 for 10 with runners in scoring position Monday. “I’ve got to be better. Obviously, when we have opportunities we have to take advantage of it. Right now it sucks but we can’t do anything about it but show up tomorrow and win a game.
“Myself included, we have to have better at-bats. There’s nothing we can do about it right now. We have to show up tomorrow and beat those guys.”
They’ll show up with a new starting catcher – and maybe some disgruntled fans in the seats after Kiké Hernandez criticized the lack of energy in the stadium.
“I think just as a team we were flat today,” Hernandez said. “We had no energy. The stadium had no energy. The fans had no energy. Overall, it was a pretty bad game for everybody who calls themselves Dodgers.
“Fans here do a great job of showing up and packing the stadium every night and having a lot of passion for the team. Tonight, for whatever reason, I guess, as contagious as energy can be from the fans to the players, it was players from the fans tonight.”

Hernandez was asked how a team could come out flat for an LCS game.
“It was a playoff game, and it didn’t feel like a playoff game,” he said. “Not just because of the fans, but because of how we were playing the game. … We sucked. That’s why we lost.”
Hernandez criticized the fans for only getting loud when they booed Yasmani Grandal.
“It sucks,” he said. “It’s the big leagues. If you think you can do better, catching 99 mph fastballs and breaking balls, come on down and put the gear on.”
Dodgers manager Dave Roberts thinks Austin Barnes can do better. The first question in his press conference was about the miserable series Grandal is having and the boos it drew from the home fans Monday.
“We’ll play Austin tomorrow,” Roberts said. “Austin will catch.”
Roberts has already benched Grandal once in this series, starting Barnes in Game 2 after Grandal committed two errors (one on a catcher’s interference) and was charged with two passed balls in Game 1.
The problems continued with Grandal back in the lineup for Game 3. He had one breaking ball in the dirt carom off him for a wild pitch, allowing a run to score from third base and was charged with a third passed ball on a ball that hit his glove squarely.
“I think it’s driving you guys more nuts than it’s driving me,” Grandal said when questioned after the game.
Told that Roberts had announced Barnes as the Game 3 starter, Grandal was asked if he felt the Dodgers were losing confidence in him.
“They’re losing confidence in me? Is that what you think?” he said. “Not really. At any point, one swing can change the game.
“I’m known for three things – taking care of my pitchers, slugging and getting on base. I need to get back to that.”
Grandal (3 for 22 this postseason) should take a few of his teammates with him.
The Brewers’ starters had earned such little respect coming into this series that even their own manager Craig Counsell has chosen among them as the lesser of evils, waiting until the last minute to announce a starter and reaching for the bullpen phone before many in the stands have reached for their second beer.
But Gio Gonzalez, Wade Miley and now Chacin have combined to allow just one run in 13 innings, holding the Dodgers to a .133 batting average (6 for 45) in those innings of “initial out-getting.”
“It’s just one of those things,” Dodgers first baseman Max Muncy said. “They’re two very good pitchers (Miley and Chacin). You’ve got to give credit to them. At the same time, we had some opportunities.”
They did get runners to second and third with one out in the second inning after Yasiel Puig doubled. But Chacin struck out Grandal, intentionally walked Hernandez and struck out the pitcher, Walker Buehler. In the fifth, Grandal did lead off with a bloop double. But he stayed there as Hernandez flew out, Buehler struck out and Joc Pederson flew out.
It was a familiar performance to any of those unhappy fans who followed the team through the regular season. Capable as they are on offense, they were also inclined to throw out duds like this against middling pitchers like Chacin all too often.

“In games like this, things like that get exploited.”
Trailing by multiple runs in the sixth inning for the third consecutive game, the Dodgers finally ran into the buzzsaw version of the Brewers bullpen. Corey Knebel, Joakim Soria and Josh Hader retired eight Dodgers in order, six on strikeouts before Counsell handed the ninth to Jeremy Jeffress, who surrendered the go-ahead, game-winning home run to Justin Turner in Game 2.
Jeffress struggled again this time, giving up a single to Turner and a double to Manny Machado. He got Cody Bellinger to pop up then walked Puig to load the bases.
Grandal and Brian Dozier left them loaded, both striking out.
“For whatever reason, we just didn’t have it as a team today,” Hernandez summarized.
#Dodgers manager Dave Roberts talks about @buehlersdayoff's outing, @YazmanianDVL08's performance and more. pic.twitter.com/DQ8q81udSd
— SportsNet LA (@SportsNetLA) October 16, 2018

The @Brewers aren’t messing around in the 1st. 👀 #NLCS pic.twitter.com/aUiYjpucrY
— MLB (@MLB) October 15, 2018

Two outs, runner on 3rd, and the ball gets by Yasmani Grandal!
Brewers tack on another run to make it 2-0 over LA. pic.twitter.com/o6NrUKbrSE
— FOX Sports: MLB (@MLBONFOX) October 16, 2018

ORLANDO MAGIC. #NLCS pic.twitter.com/jBRawTRq79
— MLB (@MLB) October 16, 2018

