Rams feel ‘fortunate’ that Cooper Kupp knee injury is not more serious


THOUSAND OAKS – Unable to walk, Rams receiver Cooper Kupp sat on a cart while teammates came over to console him. That’s usually a sign of something terrible, so the Rams justifiably could exhale Monday.
For the second time in eight days, Kupp appears to have avoided disaster. The knee injury he suffered in Sunday’s game at Denver turned out to be a sprain of his MCL, not any type of serious tear, so while Kupp might miss a game or two, it seems his season has been saved, and that’s all that matters to the Rams.
Coach Sean McVay said Kupp’s status is “week to week” and that the talented second-year receiver is unlikely to play Sunday at San Francisco on Sunday. The Rams then host Green Bay on Oct. 28.
“Depending on how he responds, it will kind of be a week-to-week basis, but that’s really fortunate news, given the way that play looked,” McVay said.
Kupp played Sunday, one week after he suffered a concussion that apparently left no lingering symptoms, but he had to leave in the second quarter after a jet-sweep run ended in a bad way.
Kupp’s left leg twisted at an ugly angle after Broncos safety Darian Stewart brought him down near the sideline with an illegal “horse-collar” tackle. Kupp couldn’t get up. McVay crossed the field and, with a dour face, talked to Kupp while trainers worked on him and helped him hobble to the cart.
Amazingly, after only eight minutes of game action, Kupp returned for the start of the third quarter but didn’t look full speed, so the Rams pulled him again. Further tests Monday revealed the ligament sprain.
Shortly after the game, Kupp said he was feeling “a little stiff” but seemed to be walking without laboring.
“I wanted to play,” Kupp said. “It’s just hard not being able to go out there and compete. You feel like you’re letting the guys down not being able to go out there and give it your all. For me, I’m always going to go out there and push and try to get out there on the field and play. But it comes down to what’s best for this team in the long haul, and what (trainer) Reggie (Scott) and the training staff believes is best for us.”
Any amount of time without Kupp would be significant for the Rams’ offense. Kupp leads the Rams with five receiving touchdowns and is second with 30 receptions and third with 438 receiving yards.
The Rams still have top receivers Robert Woods and Brandin Cooks. If Kupp doesn’t play, Josh Reynolds again will be in line for a bigger role. Reynolds has 3 catches for 37 yards this season, but against the Broncos, he had a pass from quarterback Jared Goff bounce off his facemask, after it was partially deflected, and get intercepted.
McVay left open the possibility of signing another receiver from outside the organization, but Woods should remain the focus. Goff and running back Todd Gurley rightfully are receiving high praise this season, but Woods’ name also longs on a the early short list for Rams MVP in 2018.
Woods had 7 catches for 109 yards against Denver, and once again shifted to a different role after Kupp left the game. Woods now has exceeded 100 yards in three of his last four games. With 524 yards in six games, Woods already is only 258 yards from exceeding his career high, which he set last season.
“He is ‘Mr. Consistent,’” Goff said after the game. “He is a guy, for me, that I am so comfortable with. He can play any position and run any route. He understands leverages. He understands coverage. I just have a really good comfort level with him and rely on him.”
For the second consecutive game, Woods seamlessly shifted his role and thrived against a Denver defense that seemed determined to stifle the Rams’ passing game. Woods caught half of Goff’s 14 completions.
“I just played my game,” Woods said. “When guys go down, our confidence in the other guys stepping up and making plays is really high. There is no added pressure or added stress when that situation comes up.”

“It means you feel good about being 6-0,” McVay said, “but when you talk about who was the last undefeated team last year, I don’t know.”
McVay said the status of starting left guard Rodger Saffold (knee), starting linebacker Matt Longacre (back) and starting defensive lineman Michael Brockers (shoulder) all are day to day, but that all should play against the 49ers.
McVay also left open the possibility of the return of kicker Greg Zuerlein, who has missed five consecutive games in recovery from a groin injury.
Rookie linebacker Obo Okoronkwo can return to practice this week. Okoronkwo went on the “physically unable to perform” list at the end of training camp, while he recovered from offseason foot surgery.
