All the right moves? Former CA conservative helps others leave state


Paul Chabot was done running. So he moved.
Fresh off his second straight loss as a Republican candidate for an Inland congressional seat, Chabot and his family relocated after the 2016 election from Rancho Cucamonga to McKinney, Texas.
“My family and I put our heart and soul into Southern California wanting to rebuild,” he said. After losing his rematch with Rep. Pete Aguilar, D-Redlands, “we came to the conclusion you can’t help people who don’t want to help themselves.”
Today, Chabot’s literally in the business of getting people to follow his path.
His company, Conservative Move, helps families relocate from blue to red states like Texas, Idaho, Tennessee, and Utah. Frustrated with feeling marginalized in a solidly blue state, many conservative Californians have left for more politically friendly locales.
A naval reserve intelligence officer and Iraq War veteran, Chabot ran an for the open seat representing the 31st Congressional District – Rancho Cucamonga, Redlands, San Bernardino, Colton, Loma Linda, Rialto, and Grand Terrace – in 2014.
He overcame a crowded field to finish first in the primary and faced Aguilar in the general election. Chabot came within 3,500 votes of beating Aguilar, a former Redlands mayor who enjoyed substantial support from the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.
Blaming his loss on a lack of support from GOP establishment, Chabot ran again in 2016, this time losing to Aguilar 56-to-44 percent.
He had harsh words for California in announcing his move to Texas, describing his former home as “overrun by illegals, drug addicts and violent criminals under the umbrella of a radical liberal ideology that has destroyed the state.”
Chabot first visited McKinney in 2014 and loved it. He said McKinney reminded him of Orange County in the 1980s “before it was built out.”
Since starting his company, Chabot, whose company motto is “Helping Conservatives Move Right,” said the response has been “overwhelming.”
“Clients say they can’t even talk about conservative values in their communities,” he said, referring to California conservatives. “They don’t feel like they can be themselves.”
Kurtis Ward and his wife used Conservative Move to move from Long Beach to Texas in September 2017.
“I just feel bad for a lot of the conservatives that are out (in California), just having no voice,” he said. “Conservative voices (in California), you speak up about some things and you’re just bullied down.”
But Ward, who grew up in Rancho Cucamonga, said finances, not politics, prompted his relocation. He said he and his wife were paying $1,600 a month for a 600-square-foot apartment and he was spending nearly two-and-a-half hours driving to and from work each day.
It’s not clear how many conservatives have left California in recent years. Between 2011 and 2015, more than 122,000 residents of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties left for Texas, according to census estimates, but there are no census data to explain why.
Economics is a major reason why California Republicans are losing voters, academic observers say.
“It’s really about who hasn’t moved into California, or registered as a Republican,” said Marcia Godwin, a professor of public administration at the University of La Verne. “It is less affordable to retire to California and manufacturing jobs have not returned. Population growth has continued, but it means that suburban and formerly rural areas are becoming more densely populated, favoring Democrats.”
Others add that longer term economic trends in the have contributed to the state’s conservative downturn.
“In the early 1990s, the end of the Cold War led to a rapid decline in the defense industry and an exodus of its workers, but their motive was economic, with political consequences as a side effect,” said Jack Pitney, a professor of politics at Claremont McKenna College.
“More recently, the high cost of living has driven out many middle-class voters who might lean Republican. But once again, the driver is economics. They head for the red states because they are cheaper, not because they are more conservative.”
Redlands Tea Party Patriots activist John Berry worries that the loss of California conservatives hurts conservatives who remain.
“If you haven’t moved by now, that means you’re here to fight,” he said. “But I think there’s definitely going to be an impact.”
Chabot encourages conservatives still in California to stay through the midterms and vote. But he understands if they’re ready to leave.
“They’re leaving a fight but like I say, sometimes you’ve got to fight where you’ve got a fighting chance,” he said.

