Speaker John Bercow wants independent body to examine Commons bullying claims


Commons Speaker John Bercow has called for an independent body to be set up to investigate allegations of harassment and bullying in Parliament.
He told MPs they should learn the lessons of the expenses scandal, which led to external oversight of claims.
The speaker has faced calls to quit after a report said harassment had been tolerated and concealed for years.
Conservative MP Maria Miller told Mr Bercow a "change in leadership" was needed at the top "including you".
Other MPs also said Mr Bercow, who has denied allegations that he bullied senior staff, was not the right man to oversee the changes and should stand down immediately.
Andrew Bridgen questioned how those "deemed to be part of the problem could ever hope to be part of the solution" while Anne Main said the "old adage is that the fish rots from the head".
Ministers are currently being questioned in the Commons about Monday's critical report by Dame Laura Cox which said harassment allegations had not been dealt with properly because of a culture of "acquiescence and silence".
In a short statement at the start, Mr Bercow said it was clear that decisive action was needed and Dame Laura's main recommendations accepted.
He said it was up to MPs to decide, but he said he thought the investigation of harassment and bullying claims should be handed over to a new external body, independent of MPs.
"I firmly believe the only possible way to resolve this matter is the establishment of a body which is entirely independent and external to Parliament to hear and adjudicate on all allegations of bullying, harassment and sexual misconduct."
The new regulator, he said, should be able to decide whether historical cases dating back many years should be investigated.
Commons leader Andrea Leadsom said the new complaints procedure was working well but it was "far from job done" and harassment must be "stamped out" completely.
She criticised MPs who had "turned a blind eye" to the allegations.
